>> This is "Nuevo."
After 44 years, the United
States Space Agency NASA
will return to look
for life on Mars.
In 1976, a team of scientist led
by NASA engineer Gilbert Levin
claimed to have found
life on the Red Planet.
However, the directors
of the Viking mission
did not reach a consensus
on whether his results were
proof of life.
Since then, there have been
no future searches for life
on Mars.
Though, there have
been exploration
for waters and
continued investigation
of the geological composition
of the Red Planet.
There is no clear reason why
the search for life on Mars
has been avoided.
The most important
mission for Rover 2020
will be precisely this,
to look for life on Mars.
This is Nuevo.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gaia presents "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussan.
>> While the NASA missions are
being organized for a potential
site landing of
the rover in 2020,
the Russian-European Trace
Gas Orbiter mission is already
collecting data, which could
soon produce results that good
lead scientists to confirm
that life does, in fact,
exist on Mars.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Since the beginning
of the new millennium,
the European Space Agency
has sought to confirm that
the presence of methane on
Mars is a result of bacteria
activity producing this gas.
The Andalusia Institute
of Astrophysics designed
part of the NOMAD
instruments, which
are a key piece of the ExoMars
Orbiter specifically intended
to study methane--
a gas that the Earth produces.
Living organisms naturally
produce this gas.
And the discovery on Mars was
a complete surprise in 2004.
The European Space Agency's
Mars Express Orbiter
found large amounts of
methane at that time
on the surface of Mars.
And then oddly, it disappeared.
Methane, a natural gas,
takes centuries to degrade.
Therefore, the
surprising variability
of methane abundance
led some scientists
to suggest its organic
origin and its presence
was cyclical, meaning it is
related to seasonal spikes.
Since then, European scientists
have carried out missions
to search for bacteria
that produce methane.
But they have been
faced with a planet that
is very unpredictable.
Both the Beagle mission in 2003
and the Schiaparelli mission
in 2016 succumbed
to a planet that
has become the graveyard
of countless missions
over the past 50 years.
However, the Trace
Gas Orbiter mission
could generate extraordinary
results in the coming months.
But only if it was
confirmed that methane
appears and disappears with
a predictable regularity.
The Schiaparelli mission could
have confirmed these results
with an analysis on the
ground, but unfortunately, it
did not happen.
NOMAD will not only generate
the first accurate global map
of methane in the atmosphere of
Mars, but will also track it.
Observing it against the
surface of the Red Planet
to find the source
of production,
and the disappearance of
the gas when it happens.
NOMAD will also be able to
distinguish the methane's
isotopic composition
to find its geological
or biological origin.
Meanwhile, the
2020 rover mission
is preparing to collect
samples of the Martian soil,
and send them back to
Earth, not an easy task.
The general mission is known
as MSR, the Mars Sample Return
mission, and will consist of at
least three separate missions.
In the first mission, the 2020
Mars, a twin of Curiosity,
will take a drill and
collect soil samples
throughout its land
exploration process.
The second stage will be the
SRL probe, a sample retrieval
and launch mission to
collect the samples obtained
by the 2020 Rover, and
launch them into Mars orbit
to be collected
by the SRO probes.
The probe will be launched
into space by a MAV--
a Mars ascent vehicle.
This is a rover based
on the Curiosity design
that would transport the
MAV rocket on its back.
This mobile MAV would
be able to travel over
a considerable distance,
and could launch the MAV
from almost any
point in its journey.
The orbiter that will transport
the samples back to Earth
will be launched in 2024.
And it is thought that before
the end of the next decade,
it will be possible to confirm
or reject the possibility
that microscopic life
on Mars now exists.
According to the plans, NASA
has three possible scenarios
to search for life on Mars.
The Jezero crater, a
favorite among researchers,
is an ancient lake
with sediments
of all types and fossil deltas.
The presence of carbonates
and phyllosilicates
indicate that the water
of the lake at one time
had a neutral pH, meaning that
it was habitable for life.
Unlike other younger areas on
Mars, such as the Meridiani
Planum, the second
place, selected
is the region of Syrtis Major,
one of the oldest on Mars.
And is covered by
clay minerals that
revealed the ancient presence
of water at high temperatures.
In this location, the
area of Columbia Hills,
the Gusev crater is
already well-known
as it was explored by the famous
Spirit rover a decade ago.
Its inclusion in the list
of possible candidate
locations for Mars
2020 exploration
has caused much controversy.
The discovery of the
presence of silica by Spirit
is evidence that
in the past, there
were hydrothermal vents
in the surface of Mars.
Syrtis Major, or Jezero, are
areas in which liquid water
ran across the Martian surface.
In Columbia Hills, the water
came out of its interior.
If this place is chosen,
it would be the first time
that a Martian probe has
landed in the same place
as a previous mission.
However, of the three
places, Columbia Hills
was the least preferred.
And few believe that they will
be in the final selection.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In short, the existence
of methane on Mars is one
of the great mysteries
of the Red Planet.
Making a categorical
conclusion will take
many more years of research.
Only then, will it
be possible to know
if life ever existed on Mars.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In 1976, two different
missions landed on Mars.
And then in May of 1977, Viking
twin probes descended to Mars.
Those responsible for the
Viking Martian Exploration
Program found evidence
of biological properties
in the analysis of the soil and
atmosphere of the Red Planet.
The probes, which reached
their destination respectively
in July and September
of 1976, were expressly
equipped for a series of
specific organic tests.
Among them was one aimed
at analyzing the atmosphere
in search of gases
of biological origin
that existed in
significant quantities.
The soil study,
on the other hand,
was carried out through
four biochemical tests.
After months of studying
the data that was obtained,
the official NASA
conclusions stated
that there was no life on Mars.
But there are still
other conflicting voices.
In 2016, Gilbert Levin,
who is responsible for one
of the experiments carried
out by the Viking probes,
published an article
in the magazine
"Astrobiology," in cooperation
with biologist Patricia Straat.
In it, he defends what he
has claimed, and I quote,
"the experimental
tests of the Viking
indicate that on the
surface of the Red Planet,
there are microorganisms
capable of surviving
in the harsh conditions of
the Martian environment."
Life on Mars is an idea
that only a small group
of scientists share.
>> I was able to put together
an experiment that went to Mars
to look for life, by picking up
a sample of the Martian soil--
the Viking spacecraft
Lander did that.
And inoculating it
into a small tube,
in which a squirt of
radioactive nutrient was placed.
Were any microorganisms
present--
hopefully-- they would
recognize the nutrient,
eat it, and give
off radioactive gas.
Well, no one, including
me, was very hopeful this
would work on Mars.
However, the possibility
of life on Mars
was so astounding that NASA
described the whole experiment
of looking for life on Mars
as perhaps, the greatest
experiment in the
history of science.
Which is puzzling.
Because while they
still say that,
there's something wrong in
their lack of pursuit of it.
At any rate,
surprisingly, as soon
as the first square squirt of
nutrient hit that Martian soil,
we got a big bulge
of gas coming out.
And it came out for the entire
seven days, or Martian sols,
of the experiment.
That was astounding.
But we had conceived
of that possibility
being false, being
absolutely conducted
by chemicals in the soil,
rather than microorganisms.
So we had a test for that, too.
We had a control experiment
carefully designed,
really designed by NASA.
And it was if you ever unlikely
got a positive response,
you would take a duplicate
sample of that same soil.
And put it in a little tube,
just like the first sample.
But now heated to 160 degrees
centigrade-- a temperature
they selected as killing any
microorganisms known on Earth,
but not high enough to
destroy oxidizing chemicals
that might have
given a false answer.
So this is called the control.
You run the control.
And if it's positive, then
the agent that was active,
survived the heating-- so it's
not microbial, it's chemical.
But if it's negative,
you've killed
something that had been alive.
And that's the confirmation
that it was indeed,
a positive response for
living microorganisms
in the soil of Mars.
That is what happened.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Viking experiments were
designed to look for life forms
using the knowledge
of the '60s and '70s.
But it was not until the
early '80s when a type
of microorganism that could live
in such unfriendly conditions
was discovered--
extremophiles.
So we may simply not be
looking for the right organisms
on Mars.
According to Gilbert Levin,
one of the experiments
showed that the soil
of Mars did indeed,
test positive for a
metabolism or microorganism.
A sign that on Earth, would
suggest the presence of life.
>> For the 37 intervening years,
NASA and other astrobiology
scientists have been explaining
away or attempting to explain
away the Labeled Release,
my experimental results.
They've been unsuccessful.
No one has ever reproduced
in the laboratory
or even in theory, a chemical
that will react in that manner
and give those control results.
But it did not bother them.
They still contend that
it's some weird chemical.
One of them even
said perhaps, it's
chemistry turning into biology.
We may have arrived at
Mars at an historic time.
Well, since then, we've learned
so much about life on Earth--
that it exists every
place, except perhaps,
in red hot lava.
But wherever you go--
up, down, sideways--
there's something alive under
conditions that are sometimes
as bad as any on Mars.
And yet, these bugs
thrive on Earth.
Since my experiment,
NASA has refused
to send another life
detection experiment
to Mars or any place.
Every time I have
sent in an upgrade
of my original experiment as a
proposal for a new spacecraft,
it's been rejected.
I was told directly by the
head of the Mars program,
if you send in another
proposal to send an experiment
to look for life on Mars, it
will be immediately rejected.
That's bad science.
The reason they give
is because if they
got another equivocal answer--
which they now admit, we're
not sure it wasn't life,
but it's at least ambiguous--
if we got another
ambiguous answer,
it would hurt our
program drastically.
So we're not going
to take a chance.
That is not science,
that is politics.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Levin concluded that
the experiment had actually
detected life on Mars.
And he has championed
that viewpoint ever since.
The instrument got
positive responses
at both landing locales.
However, scientists did
not reach a consensus
on whether his results
were proof of life.
We know now that with
our present technology,
it is logical that
scientists would not
have found life or
traces of water in 1976.
The Viking probes were
unable to detect water,
but found sediments that
showed high levels of iron that
would have oxidized the organic
compounds to carbon dioxide,
going unnoticed by the
NASA mission teams.
The probes analytical
Instruments
did detect the presence
of carbon dioxide,
but it was attributed to
an atmospheric or inorganic
source.
>> Now, in the
intervening years,
several experimenters have
demonstrated there was
something wrong with the
instrument that went to look
for organic matter on Mars.
And they have explained it
away, they had impugned it.
None of the original
complaints against the validity
of the Labeled
Release experiment
remained, except the
general statement,
it's the consensus
of astrobiologists
that life was not detected.
Now, science doesn't
work by consensus.
As a matter of fact, when
Jim Martin set our Viking
1 down on the ground, he
had delayed putting it down
for two orbits because he had
seen these rocks on the ground.
He took a vote of the
scientists assembled there--
17 of us.
All 17 said, let's go down.
We're going to run out of time.
And he says, well,
thanks for your opinion.
Science is not a
democratic process.
We are not going down.
And he went one more orbit,
and got us down safely.
What I'm trying to do
is get us down safely
to rid us of the paradigm
that we are alone.
We are not alone.
There is life on Mars.
And that means there should
be life throughout the cosmos.
The next experiment should be to
send up that chiral experiment
to see whether life on
Mars is the same as life
on Earth or different.
If the chirality
were different, that
would be a stupendous discovery.
It would open up
the cosmos to life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On August 4, 2007, the
Phoenix mission was sent
to Mars.
Its main objective was
to determine if there was
water under the soil of Mars.
And to determine the
characteristics of the soil
to establish its viability
for the development of plant
life on this extreme planet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On June 19, 2008, NASA
claimed that the Phoenix probe
had found ice when performing an
excavation near the north pole
of Mars.
Earlier, some pieces
of ice were classified
after being unearthed on
June 15 by the mechanical arm
of the robot.
Later, it was determined that
the Martian soil is alkaline,
with a pH of between
eight and nine.
And was analogous to the
soil of the nearby surface
in the valleys of
Antarctica on Earth.
On September 30,
2008, the Phoenix
detected snow in the
atmosphere of Mars,
which was an
unprecedented observation.
A laser instrument
designed to analyze
interactions between
the atmosphere
and the surface of
the Martian soil
detected snow from clouds at
4,000 meters above Phoenix.
According to the
observations, the snowflakes
turned into gas before
reaching the surface of Mars.
Experiments conducted
with Phoenix instruments
also revealed traces of chemical
reactions between minerals
from the Martian soil
and liquid water,
indicating periods in
Mars historical past
that water ran on the surface.
The data generated
by the Phoenix probes
also suggests the
presence of calcium
carbonate, the main
component of limestone.
Most carbonates
and clays on Earth
are formed in the
presence of water.
The analysis of
some images and data
show what appeared to be drops
of liquid saline water that
splashed the legs of
the probe after landing.
The climate on Mars is more
extreme than that on Earth.
And given that it is
farther from the sun,
the cold is more intense,
with an average temperature
of minus 63 degrees Celsius.
Although it can descend to 80
degrees below zero Celsius.
However, during the
day, the temperature
can reach 20 degrees Celsius.
The temperature at the Mars
two poles during the winter
can drop to 140
degrees below zero.
And in the summer, it can
exceed 30 degrees centigrade
or 86 degrees Fahrenheit.
It is possible that Mars
could be a habitable planet.
Its temperatures are
lower than on Earth,
but not enough to consider that
life could not exist there.
The device that you see
here is called MOXIE.
MOXIE is being designed to
use the electricity generated
by a separate machine to convert
carbon monoxide to oxygen.
Mars' atmosphere has the
presence of 96% oxygen
and carbon monoxide.
The goal is to build a 100 scale
MOXIE so then in the 2030s,
it could produce liquid
oxygen for tanks.
The purpose of these
liquid oxygen tanks
would be to store fuel
so that astronauts could
breathe oxygen. And be able
to return to Earth from Mars.
It has been determined
that MOXIE could operate
for a period of 50 Martian days,
equivalent to about 51 Earth
days, producing about 20
grams of oxygen per hour.
With the extended
version of the device,
it is expected to produce about
2 kilograms of oxygen per hour.
The MOXIE device would
be a necessary piece
of Mars equipment.
>> This means that there
are great possibilities
for the existence of
human life on Mars.
In our next episode,
we will analyze
the life forms that
could be living
on the Red Planet
at this moment.
The extremophile
organisms that thrive
in extreme conditions that
have been found on the Earth
show that they are very
resistant to practically,
all of the most difficult
conditions for life.
I am Jaime Maussan,
and I will see you
on the next episode of "Nuevo."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gaia presented "Nuevo"
with Jaime Maussan.